Add doc on Telemetry API Tracing configuration (#9572)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/tasks/observability/distributed-tracing/configurability/telemetry-api/index.md

---
title: With the Telemetry API [Experimental]
description: How to configure tracing options with the Telemetry API (experimental).
weight: 10
keywords: [telemetry,tracing]
owner: istio/wg-policies-and-telemetry-maintainers
test: no
---

Istio provides a Telemetry API that enables flexible configuration of tracing behavior. The experimental
Telemetry API offers controls over tracing options such as sampling rates and custom tags for individual
spans, as well as backend provider selection. The options are configurable down to the the individual

> workload level.

Author: adopted.

## Before you begin

1.  Ensure that your applications propagate tracing headers as described [here](/docs/tasks/observability/distributed-tracing/overview/).
1.  Follow the tracing installation guide located under [Integrations](/docs/ops/integrations/) based on your preferred tracing backend
    to install the appropriate tracing provider.

## Telemetry API: Tracing Overview

The Telemetry API offers tracing behavior configuration control over the following at the mesh, namespace, and workload levels:

- **provider selection** - allows selection of backend providers (providers are configured in `MeshConfig`) for reporting.

> - **sampling percentage** - allows control the rate of trace sampling applied to received requests *for which no prior sampling decision has been made*.

Author: If no sampling decision has been made, it applies. If the prior hop chose not to sample, then the request will be marked as not sampled, and that will be passed along to all subsequent hops. This will not override that decision.

- **custom tags** - allows control over any custom tags to add to each generated tracing span.

- **tracing participation** - allows opting services out of reporting spans to the selected tracing providers.

### Inheritance and Overrides

Telemetry API resources inherit configuration from parent resources in the Istio configuration hierarchy:

1.  root configuration namespace
1.  local namespace
1.  workload

A Telemetry API resource in the root configuration namespace, typically `istio-system`, provides mesh-wide defaults for behavior.

> Do not to specify any workload-specific selector in the root configuration namespace (it will be ignored).

Author: This would be a primary reason not to use root config == `istio-system`. I actually haven't tested special ingress configuration in addition to root configuration.

providers to use in tracing, edit the `MeshConfig` for your mesh via:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl -n istio-system edit configmap istio
{{</ text >}}

The full set of configuration options is described in the [reference docs for MeshConfig](/docs/reference/config/istio.mesh.v1alpha1/#MeshConfig).
Typical configuration includes service address and port for the provider, as well as establishing
a limit on max tag length supported by the provider.

Each configured provider *must* be named. That name will be used to refer to the provider in the
Telemetry API.

An example set of provider configuration in `MeshConfig` is:

{{< text yaml >}}
data:
    mesh: |-
       # The following content defines two example tracing providers.
        extensionProviders:
        - name: "zippy-kin"
          zipkin:
            service: "zipkin.istio-system.svc.cluster.local"
            port: 9411
            maxTagLength: 56
        - name: "stacky-driver"
          stackdriver:
            maxTagLength: 256
        # A mesh default for provider can be specified to simplify Telemetry resources
        defaultProviders:

>             tracing: "stacky-driver"

Reviewer: Not a doc question, but an api question. Once we add other types of providers, how do we enforce that you don’t specify say Prometheus as a tracing provider?

Author: We can add validation, but we don't have a way in the API to restrict. Providers are not typed.

Here is an example configuration that uses the provider configuration from the prior section:

{{< text yaml >}}
apiVersion: telemetry.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: Telemetry
metadata:
  name: mesh-default
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  tracing:
  - providers: # only a single tracing provider can be selected at this time
    - name: zippy-kin
    customTags:
      foo:
        literal:
          value: bar
    randomSamplingPercentage: 100
{{</ text >}}

This configuration overrides the default provider from `MeshConfig`, setting the mesh default to be the `"zippy-kin"`
provider. It also sets the mesh-wide sampling percentage to be `100`, and configures a tag to be added to all trace
spans with a name of `foo` and a value of `bar`.

### Configuring namespace-scoped tracing behavior

To tailor the tracing behavior for individual namespaces, add a `Telemetry` resource to the desired namespace. Any tracing
fields specified in the namespace resource will completely override the inherited field configuration from the configuration hierarchy.

For example:

{{< text yaml >}}
apiVersion: telemetry.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: Telemetry
metadata:

>   name: namespace-override

Reviewer: Do we need to have a specific name here or are multiple selector less resources merged?

Author: We don't need a specific name, but multiple selector-less resources are not valid configuration.

  namespace: myapp
spec:
  tracing:
  - customTags:
      userId:
        header:
          name: userId
          defaultValue: unknown
{{</ text >}}

When deployed with into a mesh with the prior mesh-wide example configuration, this will result in
tracing behavior in the `myapp` namespace that sends trace spans to the `zippy-kin` provider and
randomly selects requests for tracing at a `100%` rate, but that sets custom tags for each span with

> a name of `userId` and a value taken from the `userId` request header. The custom tags behavior completely

Reviewer: Clarify: myapp ns will not get foo:bar tag and instead only get the header tag.

Author: added more text here.

---

> title: Using the Telemetry API [Experimental]
> description: How to configure tracing options using the Telemetry API (experimental).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Using the Telemetry API (Experimental)
description: How to configure tracing options using the Telemetry API.
```

Author: done.

spans, as well as backend provider selection. The options are configurable down to the the individual
workload level and provide override behavior.

## Before you begin

1.  Ensure that your applications propagate tracing headers as described [here](/docs/tasks/observability/distributed-tracing/overview/).
1.  Follow the tracing installation guide located under [Integrations](/docs/ops/integrations/) based on your preferred tracing backend
    to install the appropriate tracing provider.

## Telemetry API: Tracing Overview

The Telemetry API offers tracing behavior configuration control over the following at the mesh, namespace, and workload levels:

- **provider selection** - allows selection of backend providers (providers are configured in `MeshConfig`) for reporting.

- **sampling percentage** - allows control the rate of trace sampling applied to received requests *for which no prior sampling decision has been made*.

- **custom tags** - allows control over any custom tags to add to each generated tracing span.

- **tracing participation** - allows opting services out of reporting spans to the selected tracing providers.

### Workload Selection

> Individual workloads within a namespace are selected via a [`selector`](/docs/reference/config/type/workload-selector/#WorkloadSelector) which allows selection of workloads based on labels.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Individual workloads within a namespace are selected via a [`selector`](/docs/reference/config/type/workload-selector/#WorkloadSelector) which allows label based selection.
```

Author: done.

It is not valid to have two different `Telemetry` resources select the same workload using `selector`. Likewise, it is not valid to have two

> distinct `Telemetry` resources in a namespace with no `selector` specified.

Reviewer 3: What's the behavior when this happens? Can we elaborate on that too.

Author: It is undefined. I'm worried that documenting the behavior could lead to a dependency on the behavior itself. As part of alpha, I'd like use to consider rejecting such configuration at validation. Thoughts?

Reviewer 3: Yes, rejecting is preferred.

### Scope, Inheritance, and Overrides

Telemetry API resources inherit configuration from parent resources in the Istio configuration hierarchy:

1.  root configuration namespace (example: `istio-system`)
1.  local namespace (namespace-scoped resource with **no** workload `selector`)
1.  workload (namespace-scoped resource with a workload `selector`)

A Telemetry API resource in the root configuration namespace, typically `istio-system`, provides mesh-wide defaults for behavior.

> Do not to specify any workload-specific selector in the root configuration namespace (it will be ignored).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Do not specify any workload-specific selector in the root configuration namespace (it will be ignored).
```

Reviewer 3: Can we reject instead of ignoring?

Author: We can, but that will have to be part of the maturing beyond experimental state at this point.

Workload-specific overrides can be achieved by applying a new Telemetry resource in the desired namespace *with a workload selector*.
Any `Tracing` fields specified in the namespace configuration will completely override the field from any parent configuration
(root configuration or local namespace).

## Using the Telemetry API for Tracing configuration

### Configuring tracing providers

Tracing providers are the backend collectors and processors that receive tracing spans
and process them for storage and retrieval. Example providers include Zipkin, Jaeger, Lightstep,
Datadog, and Apache SkyWalking.

For Istio, tracing providers are configured for use within the mesh via `MeshConfig`. To configure new
providers to use in tracing, edit the `MeshConfig` for your mesh via:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl -n istio-system edit configmap istio
{{</ text >}}

The full set of configuration options is described in the [reference docs for MeshConfig](/docs/reference/config/istio.mesh.v1alpha1/#MeshConfig).
Typical configuration includes service address and port for the provider, as well as establishing
a limit on max tag length supported by the provider.

> Each configured provider *must* be named. That name will be used to refer to the provider in the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each configured provider *must* be uniquely named. That name will be used to refer to the provider in the
```

Telemetry API.

An example set of provider configuration in `MeshConfig` is:

{{< text yaml >}}
data:
  mesh: |-
      extensionProviders: # The following content defines two example tracing providers.

>       - name: "zippy-kin"

Reviewer 3: Is the name intentionally weird? :)

Author: i wanted to avoid naming it directly after the backend provider to hopefully avoid giving the impression that a naming scheme is required. other than that, I don't care about the name. open to suggestions.

        zipkin:
          service: "zipkin.istio-system.svc.cluster.local"
          port: 9411
          maxTagLength: 56
      - name: "stacky-driver"
        stackdriver:
          maxTagLength: 256
      defaultProviders: # If a default provider is not specified, Telemetry resources must fully-specify a provider
          tracing: "stacky-driver"
{{</ text >}}

### Configuring mesh-wide tracing behavior

Telemetry API resources inherit from the root configuration namespace for a mesh, typically `istio-system`. To configure
mesh-wide behavior, add a new (or edit the existing) `Telemetry` resource in the root configuration namespace.

Here is an example configuration that uses the provider configuration from the prior section:

{{< text yaml >}}
apiVersion: telemetry.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: Telemetry
metadata:
  name: mesh-default
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  tracing:

>   - providers: # only a single tracing provider can be selected at this time

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - providers: # only a single tracing provider is supported at this time
```

Author: done.

---

> title: Configuring tracing using the Telemetry API (Experimental)
> description: How to configure tracing options using the Telemetry API (experimental).
> weight: 10
> keywords: [telemetry,tracing]
> owner: istio/wg-policies-and-telemetry-maintainers
> test: no

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Configuring tracing using the Telemetry API
description: How to configure tracing options using the Telemetry API
weight: 10
keywords: [telemetry,tracing]
owner: istio/wg-policies-and-telemetry-maintainers
test: no
status: Experimental
```

(see #9895)

Author: done.

---
title: Configuring tracing using the Telemetry API
description: How to configure tracing options using the Telemetry API.
weight: 10
keywords: [telemetry,tracing]
owner: istio/wg-policies-and-telemetry-maintainers
test: no
status: Experimental
---

Istio provides a Telemetry API that enables flexible configuration of tracing behavior. The

> Telemetry API offers controls over tracing options such as sampling rates and custom tags for individual

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Telemetry API offers control over tracing options such as sampling rates and custom tags for individual
```

spans, as well as backend provider selection.

## Before you begin

> 1.  Ensure that your applications propagate tracing headers as described [here](/docs/tasks/observability/distributed-tracing/overview/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1.  Ensure that your applications [propagate tracing headers](/docs/tasks/observability/distributed-tracing/overview/).
```

> 1.  Follow the tracing installation guide located under [Integrations](/docs/ops/integrations/) based on your preferred tracing backend
>     to install the appropriate tracing provider.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1.  Follow the tracing installation guide located under [Integrations](/docs/ops/integrations/)
    to install your preferred tracing provider.
```

Reviewer 2: just "Follow the guide", you say tracing later in the sentence?

## Telemetry API: Tracing Overview

The Telemetry API offers tracing behavior configuration control over the following at the mesh, namespace, and workload levels:

> - **provider selection** - allows selection of backend providers
> ([providers](/docs/reference/config/istio.mesh.v1alpha1/#MeshConfig-ExtensionProvider)
> are configured in `MeshConfig`) for reporting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **provider selection** - allows selection of [backend providers
(configured in MeshConfig)](/docs/reference/config/istio.mesh.v1alpha1/#MeshConfig-ExtensionProvider) for reporting.
```

Reviewer 2: (Or even better, link to the part of the doc below)

> - **sampling percentage** - allows control the rate of trace sampling applied to received requests *for which no prior sampling decision has been made*.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **sampling percentage** - allows control of the rate of trace sampling applied to received requests *for which no prior sampling decision has been made*.

```

- **custom tags** - allows control over any custom tags to add to each generated tracing span.

- **tracing participation** - allows opting services out of reporting spans to the selected tracing providers.

### Workload Selection

Individual workloads within a namespace are selected via a [`selector`](/docs/reference/config/type/workload-selector/#WorkloadSelector)
which allows label-based selection of workloads.

It is not valid to have two different `Telemetry` resources select the same workload using `selector`. Likewise, it is not valid to have two
distinct `Telemetry` resources in a namespace with no `selector` specified.

> 

Reviewer 2: Must "selector" be in backticks throughout?

Author: the backticks are used in places when referring to the field in question.

### Scope, Inheritance, and Overrides

Telemetry API resources inherit configuration from parent resources in the Istio configuration hierarchy:

1.  root configuration namespace (example: `istio-system`)
1.  local namespace (namespace-scoped resource with **no** workload `selector`)
1.  workload (namespace-scoped resource with a workload `selector`)

A Telemetry API resource in the root configuration namespace, typically `istio-system`, provides mesh-wide defaults for behavior.

> Do not specify any workload-specific selector in the root configuration namespace (it will be ignored).

Reviewer 3: Should it be ignored or rejected?

Reviewer 2: "Any workload-specific selector in the root configuration namespace will be ignored/rejected."

Author: It will not be rejected (yet). That level of validation is not provided at the moment.

> Do not specify any workload-specific selector in the root configuration namespace (it will be ignored).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Do not specify any workload-specific selector in the root configuration namespace (it will be ignored). It is not valid to define multiple mesh-wide Telemetry API resource in the root configuration namespace.
```

Namespace-specific overrides for the mesh-wide configuration can be achieved by applying a new `Telemetry` resource in the desired
namespace (without a workload selector). Any `Tracing` fields specified in the namespace configuration will completely override
the field from the parent configuration (in the root configuration namespace).

Workload-specific overrides can be achieved by applying a new Telemetry resource in the desired namespace *with a workload selector*.
Any `Tracing` fields specified in the namespace configuration will completely override the field from any parent configuration
(root configuration or local namespace).

> ## Using the Telemetry API for Tracing configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Using the Telemetry API for Tracing configuration
```

Tracing Configuration or tracing configuration

### Configuring tracing providers

Tracing providers are the backend collectors and processors that receive tracing spans
and process them for storage and retrieval. Example providers include Zipkin, Jaeger, Lightstep,
Datadog, and Apache SkyWalking.

For Istio, tracing providers are configured for use within the mesh via `MeshConfig`. To configure new
providers to use in tracing, edit the `MeshConfig` for your mesh via:

{{< text bash >}}

> $ kubectl -n istio-system edit configmap istio

Reviewer 3: Not a big fan of edit cm workflow. Should we use "Operator" or Helm YAML here?

Author: We can, when that level of support is provided. It doesn't exist at the moment.

{{< /text >}}

The full set of configuration options is described in the [reference docs for MeshConfig](/docs/reference/config/istio.mesh.v1alpha1/#MeshConfig).
Typical configuration includes service address and port for the provider, as well as establishing
a limit on max tag length supported by the provider.

Each configured provider *must* be uniquely named. That name will be used to refer to the provider in the
Telemetry API.

An example set of provider configuration in `MeshConfig` is:

{{< text yaml >}}
data:
  mesh: |-
      extensionProviders: # The following content defines two example tracing providers.
      - name: "zippy-kin"
        zipkin:
          service: "zipkin.istio-system.svc.cluster.local"
          port: 9411
          maxTagLength: 56

>       - name: "stacky-driver"

Reviewer 2: Why the cutesy names?

Author: because life is long and full of pain and suffering, doubly so when reading through technical documentation for a service mesh product.

in the end, i just didn't want to give people the impression that `provider` names needed to follow any sort of scheme. they can be anything.

i've updated to use different names throughout.

---
title: Using the Telemetry API [Experimental]
description: How to configure tracing options using the Telemetry API (experimental).
weight: 10
keywords: [telemetry,tracing]
owner: istio/wg-policies-and-telemetry-maintainers
test: no
---

> Istio provides a Telemetry API that enables flexible configuration of tracing behavior. The experimental

Author: done.

Telemetry API offers controls over tracing options such as sampling rates and custom tags for individual
spans, as well as backend provider selection. The options are configurable down to the the individual
workload level and provide override behavior.

## Before you begin

1.  Ensure that your applications propagate tracing headers as described [here](/docs/tasks/observability/distributed-tracing/overview/).
1.  Follow the tracing installation guide located under [Integrations](/docs/ops/integrations/) based on your preferred tracing backend
    to install the appropriate tracing provider.

## Telemetry API: Tracing Overview

The Telemetry API offers tracing behavior configuration control over the following at the mesh, namespace, and workload levels:

> 

Reviewer 4: would be good to explain how the scope works for mesh or namespace or WL level.

> - **provider selection** - allows selection of backend providers (providers are configured in `MeshConfig`) for reporting.

Reviewer 5: nit: do we want to link to the reference page of tracer provider?

- **sampling percentage** - allows control the rate of trace sampling applied to received requests *for which no prior sampling decision has been made*.

- **custom tags** - allows control over any custom tags to add to each generated tracing span.

- **tracing participation** - allows opting services out of reporting spans to the selected tracing providers.

### Workload Selection

> Individual workloads within a namespace are selected via a `selector` which allows selection of workloads based on labels.

Reviewer 5: Shall we link to selector reference here?

Author: done.

It is not valid to have two different `Telemetry` resources select the same workload using `selector`. Likewise, it is not valid to have two
distinct `Telemetry` resources in a namespace with no `selector` specified.

### Inheritance and Overrides

Telemetry API resources inherit configuration from parent resources in the Istio configuration hierarchy:

1.  root configuration namespace

> 1.  local namespace

Reviewer 4: does local namespace mean resource without any selector?  Also, does the resource have to be named "default'?

Author: Yes. I'll update the comment to provide clarity. There is no requirement around naming in the API.

1.  workload

A Telemetry API resource in the root configuration namespace, typically `istio-system`, provides mesh-wide defaults for behavior.
Do not to specify any workload-specific selector in the root configuration namespace (it will be ignored).

Namespace-specific overrides for the mesh-wide configuration can be achieved by applying a new `Telemetry` resource in the desired

> namespace (without a workload selector). Any `Tracing` fields specified in the namespace configuration will completely override

Reviewer 4: I think it is good to require the telemetry resource name = "default", similar as default destination rule for a namespace.

Author: I'm not aware of any naming requirements for resources in Istio. Is that documented somewhere?

I think it is fine to make that a best practice for constructing Telemetry resource hierarchies, but am a bit hesitant to make it required. That seems like an API-level discussion, which can be had as we move this beyond the `experimental` stage. For this document, I want to capture existing behavior in 1.10.

For Istio, tracing providers are configured for use within the mesh via `MeshConfig`. To configure new
providers to use in tracing, edit the `MeshConfig` for your mesh via:

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl -n istio-system edit configmap istio
{{</ text >}}

The full set of configuration options is described in the [reference docs for MeshConfig](/docs/reference/config/istio.mesh.v1alpha1/#MeshConfig).
Typical configuration includes service address and port for the provider, as well as establishing
a limit on max tag length supported by the provider.

Each configured provider *must* be named. That name will be used to refer to the provider in the
Telemetry API.

An example set of provider configuration in `MeshConfig` is:

{{< text yaml >}}
data:
    mesh: |-
       # The following content defines two example tracing providers.
        extensionProviders:
        - name: "zippy-kin"
          zipkin:
            service: "zipkin.istio-system.svc.cluster.local"
            port: 9411
            maxTagLength: 56
        - name: "stacky-driver"
          stackdriver:
            maxTagLength: 256
        # A mesh default for provider can be specified to simplify Telemetry resources

>         defaultProviders:

Reviewer 5: Should we call out what will happen if defaultProviders is not set and there is no mesh wide Telemetry resource?

overrides the behavior configured in the `mesh-default.istio-system` resource.

{{< tip >}}
Any tracing configuration in a `Telemetry` resource completely overrides configuration of its parent resource in the
configuration hierarchy. This includes provider selection.
{{</ tip >}}

### Configuring workload-specific tracing behavior

To tailor the tracing behavior for individual workloads, add a `Telemetry` resource to the desired namespace and use a
`workload selector`. Any tracing fields specified in the workload-specific resource will completely override the inherited
field configuration from the configuration hierarchy.

For example:

{{< text yaml >}}
apiVersion: telemetry.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: Telemetry
metadata:
  name: workload-override
  namespace: myapp
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      service.istio.io/canonical-name: frontend
  tracing:
  - disableSpanReporting: true
{{</ text >}}

In this case, tracing will be disabled for the `frontend.myapp` workload. Istio will still forward the tracing headers,
but no spans will be reported to the configured tracing provider.

{{< tip >}}

> It is not valid to have two `Telemetry` resources with workload selectors select the same workload. In those cases,

Reviewer 4: Do we alert/warn this to users in any way?

Author: Not at this time. As we move beyond `experimental` support, validation / warnings will need to be significantly enhanced.
